State is the component specific memory in react. For example, shopping cart.
# Why regular variable isn't working?
* When react renders a component second time, it renders from the scratch. it also resets the local variable to the initail value.
* React doesn't react or trigger renders on variable change.
## To update a component with new data, we need 2 things
* Retain the data between renders.
* Trigger react to render component with new data(re-rendering).

The 'useState' hook provide those 2 things.
* The state variable retains the data between renders.
* The state setter function updates the variable trigger react to render the component again.

```javascript
import { useState } from "react"

function Fruit({fruit}) {
    return <h1>{fruit}</h1>
}

export default function FruitList() {
    const fruits = ['apple', 'orange', 'banana']

    const [index, setIndex] = useState(0)

    function next() {
        if(index < 2) {
            setIndex(index+1)
        }
    }

    function previous() {
        if(index > 0) {
            setIndex(index-1)
        }
    }

    return (
        <div>
            <button onClick={next}>Next</button>
            <button onClick={previous}>previous</button>
            <Fruit fruit={fruits[index]} />
        </div>
    )


}
```
Here, we use the index as a state vaiable and the setIndex is the state setter function. If we use local variable like 'let index=0', the functionality wiln't work.

The [] is the array destructure syntax because the useState hook returns array.
*Hooks are special functions that are only available while react is rendering*

When we call the useState hook, we tell react that we want this component to remember something. In this case, we want to remember 'index'. The 'index' and 'setIndex' can be different. But if we keep the same, it is easy to maintain the project. The setIndex function can update the state(index) and trigger react to re-render the FruitList component.

# Multiple state variables in a component
```javascript
const [index, setIndex] = useState(0)
const [cart, setCart] = useState([])
```

If the state variable aren't related to each other, then keeping multiple state variables are good. But the state variable are related, then we can keep them together in a single state variable. For example, the input groups in a form.

# How does react know which state to return?
Hooks rely on a stable call order on every render of the same component. Hooks are only called at the top level.

Internally, React holds an array of state pairs for every component. It also maintains the current pair index, which is set to 0 before rendering. Each time you call useState, React gives you the next state pair and increments the index. You can read more about this mechanism in React Hooks: Not Magic, Just Arrays.

# State is isolated and private 
State is local to a component instance on the screen. In other words, if you render the same component twice, each copy will have completely isolated state! Changing one of them will not affect the other.

# useState without react
--todo